See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/370711833

Digital Bamboo: A study on bamboo, 3D printed joints, and digitally fabricated
building components for ultralight architectures.
Conference Paper · October 2022
CITATIONS

READS

6

1,257

7 authors, including:
Marirena Kladeftira

Matthias Leschok

Cornell University

ETH Zurich

15 PUBLICATIONS 46 CITATIONS

26 PUBLICATIONS 305 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Eleni Skevaki

Patrick Ole Ohlbrock

ETH Zurich

University of Applied Sciences of Eastern Switzerland

10 PUBLICATIONS 34 CITATIONS

36 PUBLICATIONS 386 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Marirena Kladeftira on 02 October 2023.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Digital Bamboo

Marirena Kladeftira
Digital Building Technologies/
ETH Zurich
Matthias Leschok
Digital Building Technologies/
ETH Zurich

A Study on Bamboo, 3D Printed Joints,
and Digitally Fabricated Building
Components for Ultralight Architectures

Eleni Skevaki
Digital Building Technologies/
ETH Zurich

Davide Tanadini
Structural Design/ ETH Zurich
Patrick Ole Ohlbrock
Structural Design/ ETH Zurich
Pierluigi D’Acunto
Structural Design/
Technical University of Munich
Benjamin Dillenburger
Digital Building Technologies/
ETH Zurich

1

ABSTR ACT
This paper presents a novel construction system that integrates natural and artificial components through the case study of the Digital Bamboo. A reversible non-standard structure is
made of unprocessed bamboo poles connected with 3D printed joints and covered by lightweight 3D printed shading panels. The system combines multiple technologies to prefabricate
all parts of the structure, which are controlled with a chain of computational tools.

1

Bamboo has gained increased attention in the construction industry due to its fast growth,
natural tubular shape, and its ability for carbon sequestration, while it is locally available
in different parts of the globe. However, joining bamboo becomes especially challenging
because it is characterized by natural deviations and dissimilar mechanical characteristics
amongst products.

3

In this paper, we portray how combining additive manufacturing and robotic fabrication
methods allows the development of novel integrative systems for such non-standard materials. In parallel, we describe a computational workflow that allows the negotiation and control
of the multiple methods applied, but also acts as an interdisciplinary collaboration platform
between architects and engineers. The developed methods showcase the degree of agility
that is necessary to tackle the increased complexity of such projects and are presented here
through the development and execution of a building demonstrator.

406

View of the center of the pavilion
portraying the two connecting
systems and the attached
shading panels

2

Digital Bamboo in exhibition
at the Venice Biennale 2021
Digital Bamboo in exhibition
at the ZAZ Bellerive

2

3

INTRODUCTION

Bespoke Joints for Non -standard S tructures

The investigation of low-embodied-carbon materials and
carbon sinks for the production of building components is
gaining interest as a response to the large contribution of the
construction sector to the climate crisis. Existing research on
the embodied carbon per unit mass of construction materials
(Cabeza et al. 2021) pinpoints the use of biomaterials, such
as bamboo, in order to drastically reduce the embodied CO2
footprint of future buildings.

Research on customized connections for bespoke spatial
structures is not a novelty in architecture. Architects like B.
Fuller (Fuller 1954), K. Wachsmann (Sumi and Burkhalter 2018),
F. Haller and others have developed numerous typologies of
joints during the second half of the 20th century when proprietary systems started to dominate the market as initiated by
the Mero system (Mengeringhausen 1974). Until recent years,
most bespoke prefabricated connections were manufactured
by casting metal alloys in unique molds or by welding steel
plates forming a 3-dimensional node. Systems like the Ball
Mero Node have simplified the fabrication of such connections, however the more complex the structure, the more the
logistics, cost and lead time increase. Additionally, although
the system is somewhat flexible in the joint creation, its use is
limited to compatible materials and possible configurations.

Bamboo is a fast-growing natural material with a short
harvesting cycle (Moses et al. 2015) that can sequester carbon
dioxide throughout its life cycle. Its tubular shape and reinforcing rings along its length define the longitudinal orientation
of its fibers that contribute to its high strength-to-weight ratio.
This natural shape makes bamboo an excellent candidate for
replacing energy-intensive metals in space frame construction, where loads are mainly transferred axially. However, the
natural variability of unprocessed bamboo poles hinders their
use with existing connection systems. Furthermore, proprietary connection systems are designed for specific materials
like metal tubes or timber, hence the connection typology is
primarily defined by those. In parallel, they limit the possible
geometric configurations one can build, as their connections
define largely the complexity and topology of structures.
The inherent variability of unprocessed bio-materials can be
easily embedded in connection systems that are manufactured with 3D printing technologies (3DP). Developments in
3DP of metal alloys and high-strength thermoplastics create
opportunities for fabricating bespoke structural connections
in a simple supply chain. In parallel, reports indicate the wider
adoption of additive manufacturing (AM) technologies by the
construction industry in the near future (Wohlers et al. 2018).
Based on these facts we can conclude that AM presents
opportunities for manufacturing connections for standardless bio-sourced materials like bamboo.

PERFORMATIVE DESIGN: STRUCTURAL AND MATERIAL SYNTHESIS

There is a growing interest to harvest the flexibility of AM for
manufacturing bespoke connections. In 2014 Arup created
the first 3DP prototypical connector for a tensegrity structure (Galjaard et al. 2015). Subsequently, other researchers
explored the opportunities of AM for space frames using metal
Binder jetting (Raspall et al. 2019), as well as AM polymers
with extrusion-based processes (Crolla et al. 2017). Although
first investigations in the field address material reduction
and design freedom, opportunities emerged to define new
systems that include biomaterials like bamboo. These challenge the practices of traditional bamboo joinery developed
over centuries in southern Asian and American regions, an
overview of which was portrayed by Dunkelberg (Dunkelberg
1992). In 2018 AM plastic connections were fabricated to
perfectly fit scanned bamboo sections for a freeform canopy
(Amtsberg and Raspall 2018). Similar research investigated
3DP bio-composite materials for bamboo joints (Paola and
Mercurio 2020; Wassenhove et al. 2021), while a recent study
focused on the connection element as the geometric space
between reciprocal bamboo poles (Qi et al. 2021).

407

4

The three parts of the structure:
primary, secondary truss, and
tertiary structure

5

Top view of the structure and the
axes of symmetry

4

Using AM to create connections for bamboo challenges the
idea of overlapping poles seen in traditional connections,
while it allows for more precision during built-up relying less
in craftsmanship to deliver better results. Many joints that
connect poles end-to-end require a chemical connection
between the bamboo and the joint, while those that use a
mechanical connection follow conventional mechanisms
used for industrial materials.
In the sections to follow we will present a new reversible connection system that was specifically developed for bamboo and
leverages AM technologies. Furthermore, we will show how its
function can be augmented to encapsulate more layers of the
structure, and finally how a digital process chain can facilitate
the development of such novel systems for local architecture.
These findings are presented in the case study of a bespoke
pavilion with different digitally fabricated components that are
all part of one digital design-to-production chain.

DIGITAL DESIGN AND MATERIAL SYSTEMS
Form Finding and A natomy of the S truc ture

The Digital Bamboo is a space frame that covers an area of
40 m2 and has a mass of only 200 kg. It is composed of 930
bamboo poles connected with 381 3DP joints. The geometry
of the pavilion is rotationally symmetric, consisting of three
cantilevering wings supported by three spatial columns (Figure
2). Each of the three cantilevers further displays a reflection
symmetry on the vertical plane that separates the part in two
halves (Figure 5). The symmetry of the pavilion serves multiple
purposes on the aesthetic, structural, and fabrication level.

•
•

The wide-spanning cantilevering wings are formed with
a secondary three-dimensional triangulated truss.
The tertiary structure, which is composed of planar,
non-load-bearing elements.

Due to the limited tensile capacity of the connecting system
described in the following section, the primary truss is
post-tensioned with six steel ropes that are positioned along
the reflection symmetry axes. Bamboo poles of circa 20 mm
in diameter were chosen to create a filigree triangulated structure with high geometric stiffness.
Connec ting S ystems

The bamboo poles are joined by a novel system of bespoke
connections that are specifically designed for AM. Most
custom connections produced with AM are manufactured
in metal (M3DP) or a thermoplastic material such as polylactic acid (PLA) through a layer-based extrusion process
(FFF). However, these methods are, in our opinion, unsuitable for connecting bamboo. M3DP can be used to produce
mechanically strong joints but excessively so compared to
the properties of bamboo. FFF can produce lightweight parts
which are, however, mechanically weak, anisotropic and often
delaminate.

The geometry of the pavilion is derived from an equilibrium-based form-finding process that considers the self-weight
of the structure as the dominant load case. The spatial truss
outlining the form is triangulated in three dimensions, forming
polyhedral cells to define the topology of the space frame.
The load-bearing structure is composed of three distinct parts
(Figure 4) that interact hierarchically (Tanadini et al. 2022):
•

The primary truss consists of the main load-bearing part
that spans from the columns to the tip of the cantilevers.
5

408

Digital Bamboo Kladeftira, Leschok, Skevaki, Tanadini, Ohlbrock,
D’Acunto, Dillenburger

6

7

a.

b.

c.

d.

8

9

6

Split of bamboo fibers due to excess stress: failure of the notch on the left,
and the pin on the right

7-8 The connecting system, or “notch,” between bamboo and 3D printed

connection
9

a) individual definition of parts based on a parametric model that allows
easy iterations and adjustments, b) orientation in space according to
defined planar interfaces between parts, c) combination of all geometries
via modification of the distance values, and d) generation of a mesh file for
fabrication

PERFORMATIVE DESIGN: STRUCTURAL AND MATERIAL SYNTHESIS

409

11

10
10 The core, limbs, add-on skin, caps, and assembly info are integrated

into the joint
11 The central connection connects 18 bamboo poles and 6 post-tension

cables; due to structural demands, it is manufactured in steel with DMLS

The species of bamboo used was unknown and therefore
also its mechanical properties. We performed tensile tests on
bamboo poles with a pin connection utilizing a simple testing
station with 0.2 kN incremental loading. Based on the tests’
results (1.4 kN), we chose to use the MultiJet Fusion (MJF)
printing process because it delivers slightly better tensile
strength than the bamboo. Thus, we ensure that the material
is adequate, not over performing and does not represent the
weakest point in the structure. The material printed is polyamide 12 (PA12) with characteristic tensile strength of 48 MPa,
while lightweight with a specific weight of 1.01 g/cm3. MJF is a
powder-based method that guarantees isotropic performance
of printed parts and is used for the first time in architectural
applications, to the best of our knowledge.
A number of requirements made the design and development
of the connection system specifically challenging:
•

•

•

410

Bamboo is a natural material with variable cross-sections
along the longitudinal axis and varying diameters among
the different poles.
We intended to create a fully-reversible connection between
the nylon and the bamboo, as the structure is a temporary
installation.
The joints should not only fulfill their structural role in the
space frame, but also incorporate additional elements, in
this case, the anchorages for the post-tension cables, the
connectors to the shading elements, and the bundling of
multiple bamboo poles.

Each 3D printed node generates a notch to evenly transfer
stresses between the nylon and the bamboo (Figures 7, 8).
Unlike typical pins or friction-reliant connections, the notch
acts similar to a pin but distributes the forces over a larger
area. Therefore, the longitudinal splitting of fibers is prevented
(Figure 6) delivering better performance in tension than a pin
connection. The rounded shape of the notch and the high
tolerance between bamboo and connection, in conjunction
with the triangulation of the structure ensures that there is
no friction or bending in the connection. After tensile testing
on more than 100 poles, the performance of the notch was
determined according to the fifth percentile (1.8 kN) of the
measured ultimate strength. The result was subsequently
used to perform further structural analysis of the structure.
Based on the analysis we identified the weak points, where
a single pole is replaced by a bundle of three, adopting the
technique as commonly used in traditional bamboo structures. The bundles highlight the force flow through the space
frame in a continuous manner and architecturally outline the
pavilion and the inner compression ring.
Each joint consists of the core, the limbs, add-on features, the
caps, and 3D printed assembly information (Figures 9, 10).
The core is defined by a custom algorithm that analyzes the
topology of the structure and, based on the material profiles
specified, calculates the minimum geometric region so that
the bamboo poles do not collide. The limbs stem from the
core in the directions where the joint meets the bamboo.
They feature the necessary logistic information (enumeration,

Digital Bamboo Kladeftira, Leschok, Skevaki, Tanadini, Ohlbrock,
D’Acunto, Dillenburger

12

13

12 “Sandwich” printing approach
13 The diaphanous 3DP shading

panels follow the triangulation
of the structure
14 Assigned groups based on the

distance of the center and the
symmetry axes. rules are applied
14

location, etc.) for the assembly. The add-on features include
the insertion and fastening details for the post-tensioning
cables (7 mm channels along the axis of the cables), and the
connections to the shading panels (threaded tubes perpendicular to the planes of the latter). The caps are standardized
parts that surround and connect the limbs of the joint with
the bamboo and are fastened with zip ties. The joints are
hollow with a minimal wall thickness of 4 mm, which was
identified to be adequate through multiple tensile tests of the
connection system.
Since each node is composed of several parts, the configuration of which is different for each specific location in
the structure, the design of these parts is not trivial with
conventional mesh-based methods (Kladeftira et al. 2021).
To tackle this problem, we employed volumetric modeling
as an effective method for designing complex connections.
This approach allows for an easy and precise combination
of 3D shapes while avoiding the arduous process of Boolean
operations. The interface of the computational method was
developed within the Rhino/Grasshopper environment. The
topology of the joints was created with a custom script based
on the COMPAS framework (Mele et al. 2021) and the geometry generation was performed with a customized workflow
utilizing Axolotl (Bernhard and Dillenburger 2019). The computational method and detailed development of the connection
system are fairly complex and described in depth in a dedicated companion article.

PERFORMATIVE DESIGN: STRUCTURAL AND MATERIAL SYNTHESIS

according to the color groups

The nylon-based connection system fulfills the structural
demands of all connections in the pavilion except for one
special joint located in the center of the structure. This joint
connects 18 bamboo poles and 6 post-tension cables and
follows the same principle as the rest of the joints but it is
fabricated in steel with Direct Metal Laser Sintering (Figure 11).
Skin

The pavilion is covered by rigid panels that provide shade. This
shading layer follows a panelization derived from the top-layer
triangulation of the bamboo truss (Figures 3, 13). Following the
lightweight character of the pavilion, the 75 bespoke panels
that cover the structure are digitally fabricated by combining
a mesh Lycra textile and an extruded thermoplastic in a new
process called add-on 3D printing (add-on 3DP). This process
allows the production of ultralight panels, as the textile has
a weight of 173 g/m2 and the 3DP plastic is applied only for
forming/framing and stiffening in selective areas.
The fabrication method impacts the aesthetics of the shading
panels, as one can clearly distinguish between the textile and
printed plastic. Therefore, the stiffening ribs are designed in
a computational process that follows the vocabulary of the
space grid and serves the structural integrity of the panels. We
applied mesh grammar rules that subdivide the frame of the
individual panels according to area, location and patterning
schemes in the steps shown below:

411

The panels were printed flat and bent to an inverted catenary
shape during assembly. The result is a three-dimensional filigree, diaphanous skin with graded porosity, which makes for
a playful and adapted shadow pattern (Figure 13).

15

1. For every vertex v of the starting triangular face, create
a new face between vertex v, the midpoints of the edges
that are incident to v and the centroid of the face. With
this scheme, every triangle is now split into three quads
(Figure 14 a-b).
2. Assign groups to the resulting quad faces based on their
distance to the center of the structure (Figure 14c). The
number of subdividing iterations varies for every group:
the outermost are subdivided once, while the innermost
are complete after 4 subdivision steps (Figure 14d).
3. In order to reduce the wind load, introduce cut-outs
inside the sub-triangles of the pattern, which vary in size
and frequency depending on their position inside the
structure (Figure 14e). In the digital environment, this
operation is as simple as culling the last face generated
by the termination rule.
4. Add a connection detail to each original vertex v that
includes a hole for a screw connection to the corresponding joint.

To fabricate the panels a sequential printing process was
developed to create a “sandwich” material system where the
textile is placed and locked between printed layers of plastic.
The mesh-like porous fabric is used for stronger adhesion
between the printed layers (Figure 12), as the plastic penetrates the fabric and adheres directly to the first layers. Two
layers of PETG are printed, the fabric is placed and more
layers are printed on top. The first PETG layer of the upper
part is printed with a small offset to the initial print path in
order to avoid collisions with the textile. In order to compensate for the increased starting height, the print speed is
reduced during the first top-layer.
Foundation

A steel plate acts as a non-invasive foundation for the pavilion.
Its weight ensures the anchoring of the space frame to the
ground as wind loads would cause up-lifting of the ultralight structure. Bespoke concrete footings act as transition
elements to connect the structure to the steel plate. Any tolerance resulting from an uneven placement of the steel plates
or from the assembly of the structure is mitigated by those.
The design of the footings reflects the shape of the base
connector (the lowest 3D printed connection) that joins
together 19 bamboo poles and the post-tensioning cable. The
post-tension cables are anchored inside the concrete feet and
inserted before the latter are fixed to the steel base. The orientation of the cable inside the concrete is guaranteed by a 3DP
guiding tube embedded in the concrete. The concrete feet
are cast into a removable polymer 3DP formwork made from
biodegradable plastic (PLA) (Figure 15). An inner cavity in the
mold system helps to reduce material, but also provides easy
access to anchor the post-tensioning cable inside the footing.

16
15 3DP formwork is submerged into sand for casting and after the hydration

of concrete is removed by applying heat

TABLE 1. Overview of the different manufacturing processes

and production logistics

16 The cuts needed are nested with an algorithm to make the most of the full

length of the bamboo poles and marked with a collaborative robot
17 Workflow and data flow diagram for the Digital Bamboo
18 Assembly sequence

412

Digital Bamboo Kladeftira, Leschok, Skevaki, Tanadini, Ohlbrock,
D’Acunto, Dillenburger

17

PRODUCTION AND ASSEMBLY LOGISTICS
Produc tion Logistics

The computational tools developed ensure a smooth design-toproduction workflow (Figure 17). The use of multiple digital
fabrication methods to manufacture all the parts of the
structure allows an efficient production in a short time while
maintaining high precision. The most crucial part of the
assembly process is the matching of joints and bamboo
poles. The joints are equipped already in the design stage
with a labeling system in the limbs that features the joint ID
and the pole ID that corresponds to the specific limb. The
system is simple and, therefore, can be assembled by anyone
like a puzzle: starting from any one joint you match the IDs
embedded and start growing outwards until an entire module
is complete.
All the nylon joints are commissioned and produced with the
MJF technology in an external facility. Each print job takes
approximately 9 to 12 hours to complete and about 2 hours
to retrieve and clean the excess powder from the parts as
show in Table 1. The production can be distributed to multiple
printers for faster production. With each job multiple parts

can be printed at a time without compromising the quality
expediting the production for large structures.
Overall, the production time with AM is reduced compared
to conventional manufacturing where each joint is produced
individually. However, the true benefit lies in the significant
reduction of human labor and post-processing. All parts of
the digital manufacturing chain are automated: the parts take
into account the constraints of the AM methods (wall thickness, maximum dimensions, aspect ratio, resolution) and
are sent to the fabrication facility nested and ready to print.
In the remote location, where printing takes place, someone
loads the print job and subsequently unloads the parts to the
cleaning basket. Then, the joints are shipped to site.
In order to efficiently cut over 900 bamboo poles in their
respective length, reduce imprecision and avoid human errors,
we leveraged the precision of a collaborative robot to mark
all the poles within 10 hours. We created a robotic marking
station consisting of a UR10, a custom table that can host
six 3-meter-long bamboo poles and a 3D printed pen-holder
end-effector (Figure 16). Six poles are marked simultaneously

18

PERFORMATIVE DESIGN: STRUCTURAL AND MATERIAL SYNTHESIS

413

19 The Digital Bamboo exhibited at the courtyard of the ZAZ Bellerive Museum in Zurich in 2020

by the robot. In parallel, a human collaborates by labeling
the individual elements with a serialized tag ID system. The
bamboo is then cut at the marks using a chop saw. Two
notches are produced on each bamboo at both ends in order
to match the detail of the 3DP connections. For structural
reasons a constant inner core thickness is ensured (8 mm
after notching). The notch is not a typical connection type and
requires minimal processing with machinery to be carved out.
However, all notches are identical and performed at a similar
distance to the end of the pole. Therefore, this step can easily
be automated even with low cost machines made to carve
wood-like materials (MacDonald et al. 2019). As the connection system is rotation-free, the orientation of the notches on
one end does not need to align with the other end of the pole,
as one can rotate the bamboo to find the most convenient
orientation for assembly.

that is transported as all the materials are shipped before
any assembly takes place. On-site time is reduced as the
larger modules are light and can be mounted very quickly.
The second step lasts only half a day with the help of a small
crane (Figure 18). The process is repeated vice versa for
disassembly.

RESULTS, DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The notion of a digital design-to-production process is
becoming increasingly relevant in architectural research and
practice if we are to achieve a more efficient and sustainable model of construction that harvests the opportunities of
digital fabrication. The Digital Bamboo brings forward a new
vocabulary of space-frame structures merging innovative
manufacturing methods with a bio-sourced material. It has
unique aesthetics that speak of an amalgam of the digital and
the vernacular.

Discretization and On -site Assembly Sequence

The assembly of the structure happens in a two-step process.
Six distinct modules (3 columns and 3 cantilevers) are
pre-assembled on-site. In a second step, they are mounted
on the base with the help of a small crane. Then the structure is post-tensioned. This strategy minimizes the volume

The structure shelters a space of 40 m2 with a weight of only
5 kg/m2 . In existing buildings, material quantities typically
range from 500 to 1500 kg/m2 (Wolf 2014). Although these
quantities include many other layers like services and facade
systems, they are at the lower end a hundred times heavier

414

Digital Bamboo Kladeftira, Leschok, Skevaki, Tanadini, Ohlbrock,
D’Acunto, Dillenburger

than the proposed system. Other researchers investigating
lightweight building systems with bio-sourced materials
enabled by digital fabrication have managed to reduce the
material weight of a similar pavilion structure to a little over
30 kg/m2 (Alvarez et al. 2020), more than six times heavier
than Digital Bamboo. The ultralight character of the Digital
Bamboo relies not only on the choice of bamboo but also on
the development of the structural, connection system and the
materiality of the connections. The ability to digitally fabricate
all the components of the structure guarantees the minimization of excessive material use and the application of each
material only where it is truly needed.
The resources and fabrication time are kept to a bare
minimum. Space frames are one of the most efficient ways
to scale up AM by fabricating only the connections that
comprise a small fraction of the entire structure. In parallel,
high-embodied-carbon materials are used sparsely only
where needed as shown with the single stainless-steel node
and the add-on 3DP polymer to stiffen and form the textile
panels. In fact, for the production of the whole pavilion, there
was almost zero waste except for the three millimeter-thick
3DP formwork shells for the concrete foundation that can be
recycled. The cut-outs of textile and bamboo were scarce as
the pieces needed for the pavilion were nested via an optimization algorithm ensuring almost no leftover pieces. The steel
base underneath the structure was cut from excess material
that would have been discarded.
There are significant benefits to the 3DP connection system
that was developed. All the logistic information is embedded
in the 3DP parts, which are designed to facilitate human
assembly. During the assembly process several people with
no expertise or experience of the system helped intuitively in
the build-up of the structure by matching the information on
the different pieces like a big puzzle. As complexity increases
in the construction industry and digital fabrication methods
are increasingly more sophisticated, we believe that creating
smart systems such as this one will help in their wider adoption.
Furthermore, the system can be entirely disassembled as all
parts are attached mechanically with non-permanent fastenings. This was an overarching principle during the development
phase so as to ensure that the pavilion can be transported in
minimal volume and re-assembled elsewhere but also that
all materials can be recycled or reused at the end of life of
the structure. The material used for the joints was chosen
because of its strength and isotropic behavior. Alternatives
such as bioplastics are gaining popularity, however, current
bio-composite filaments are printable with FFF processes
and thus do not deliver the required strength while they have
anisotropic behavior. This would add additional constraints

PERFORMATIVE DESIGN: STRUCTURAL AND MATERIAL SYNTHESIS

as joints are highly three-dimensional objects and it would
affect both the design and the fabrication of the elements.
This project focuses on the ability to disassemble all the
distinct materials that can therefore be treated accordingly
at the end of life.
We see great potential in this combinatorial scheme of multiple
digital fabrication technologies. We believe that the future of
architecture and construction will be shaped by the new technologies available to the point that their coexistence in future
buildings will be seamless. In this respect, we also envision
that the presented construction system can be enhanced by
other technologies in the prefabrication state, like the use of
augmented and mixed reality devices for precision and quality
control during assembly or the use of mobile robotic units and
UAVs in a prefabrication cell to create bespoke prefabricated
space frame modules. These technologies can be integrated
in the process by adding tracking and localization tags in the
printed joints the geometry of which can be modified according
to assembly constraints at no manufacturing expense.

CONCLUSION
This paper presented a holistic approach for the development,
fabrication, and assembly of a novel lightweight structure that
is entirely based on digital fabrication technologies (Figure 19).
This is possible through interdisciplinary collaboration between
specialized architects and structural engineers that use
computational design and analytical tools from conception to
realization in order to control and harvest the benefits of digital
fabrication. The methods presented describe the design and
rationale for all the digital layers of the structure, as well as their
fabrication with suitable digital manufacturing methods.
Digital Bamboo provides an insight into how we can build with
bio-based materials without compromising precision, quality,
and aesthetics. It showcases how one can design with uncertainties and imprecision that are inherent to standardless
materials and use this knowledge as a driving force for innovation towards sustainable and scalable construction.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the students of the MAS DFAB ‘19-20 for
their contribution to the initial design studies, Yael Ifrah, our collaboration partner HS HI-Tech, and our sponsors that enabled the research:
HP Inc., SGSolution AG, AF Fercher AG, Holcim, Abuma Gmbh, and ZAZ
Bellerive. We are thankful for the exhibition hosts ZAZ Bellerive and ECC
Italy. The research was supported by the ETH Zurich #IPG 02-112019
and the NCCR Digital Fabrication, funded by the Swiss National Science
Foundation (NCCR Digital Fabrication Agreement #51NF40-141853).

415

NOTES
The bamboo used for this research was left untreated against degradation because of the temporary nature of the structure. We acknowledge

Mengeringhausen, Max. 1974. Process and apparatus for the
production of connectors for space frame works or the like. US patent
3826584a, filed January 31, 1972, issued July 30, 1974.

that if used untreated for an uncovered permanent structure it might

Moses, A, O Simon, and E Oke. 2015. “Comparative Analysis Of

affect its longevity. In such cases additional impregnation with chemical

The Tensile Strength Of Bamboo And Reinforcement Steel Bars As

means or other methods that prevent degradation because of environ-

Structural Member In Building Construction.” Comparative Analysis

mental, external factors or insects might be appropriate.

of The Tensile Strength Of Bamboo and Reinforcement Steel Bars as
Structural Member in Building Construction 4 (10): 47–52.

REFERENCES

Paola, Francesco Di, and Andrea Mercurio. 2020. “Design and Digital

Alvarez, Martín, Hans Jakob Wagner, Abel Groenewolt, Oliver David

Fabrication of a Parametric Joint for Bamboo Sustainable Structures.”

Krieg, Ondrej Kyjanek, Daniel Sonntag, Simon Bechert, Lotte Aldinger,

Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 975: 180–89.

Jan Knippers, and Achim Menges. 2020. “Buga Wood Pavilion.”
Architecture Research Building April: 150–61.
Amtsberg, Felix, and Felix Raspall. 2018. “BAMBOOˆ3.” In Learning,
Adapting and Prototyping, Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference of the Association for Computer-Aided Architectural Design
Research in Asia (CAADRIA) 2018. Hong Kong. 245–254.

Qi, Yue, Ruqing Zhong, Benjamin Kaiser, Long Nguyen, Hans Jakob
Wagner, Alexander Verl, and Achim Menges. 2021. “Working with
Uncertainties: An Adaptive Fabrication Workflow for Bamboo
Structures.” In Proceedings of the 2020 DigitalFUTURES. Singapore:
Springer, edited by P. F. Yuan, J. Yao, C. Yan, X. Wang, and N. Leach.
265–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-4400-6_25.

Bernhard, Mathias, and Benjamin Dillenburger. 2019. Axolotl. https://

Raspall, Felix, Carlos Banon, and Jenn Chong Tay. 2019. “AIRTABLE.

www.food4rhino.com/app/axolotl.

Stainless Steel Printing for Functional Space Frames.” In Computer-

Cabeza, Luisa F., Laura Boquera, Marta Chàfer, and David Vérez.

Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia (CAADRIA) 2019, vol. 1.

2021. “Embodied Energy and Embodied Carbon of Structural Building

113–122.

Materials: Worldwide Progress and Barriers through Literature Map

Sumi, Christian, and Marianne Burkhalter. 2018. Konrad Wachsmann

Analysis.” Energy and Buildings 231: 110612.

and the Grapevine Structure. Zurich: Park Books.

Crolla, Kristof, Nicholas Williams, Manuel Muehlbauer, and Jane

Tanadini, Davide, Patrick Ole Ohlbrock, Marirena Kladeftira, Matthias

Burry. 2017. “Smartnodes Pavilion.” In Protocols, Flows and Glitches:
22nd International Conference on Computer-Aided Architectural Design
Research in Asia (CAADRIA). 467–76.

Leschok, Eleni Skevaki, Benjamin Dillenburger, and Pierluigi D’Acunto.
2022. “Exploring the potential of equilibrium-based methods in additive
manufacturing: the Digital Bamboo pavilion.” In Proceedings of the IASS

De Wolf, Catherine. 2014. “Material Quantities in Building Structures

2022 Symposium.

and Their Environmental Impact.” MSc Thesis, Massachusetts Institute

Van Mele, Tom et al. COMPAS: A framework for computational research in

of Technology. 92. http://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/91298.

architecture and structures. V. 1.0. ETH Zurich. 2021.

Dunkelberg, Klaus. 1992. IL 31, Bambus-Bamboo: Bambus Als Baustoff;

Wassenhove, Romain van, Lars De Laet, and Anastasios P.

Bauen Mit Pflanzlichen Stäben. Stuttgart: Krämer.

Vassilopoulos. 2021. “A 3D Printed Bio-Composite Removable

Fuller, Richard Buckminster. 1954. Building Construction. US Patent

Connection System for Bamboo Spatial Structures.” Composite

2,682,235, filed December 12, 1951, issued June 29, 1954.

Structures 269 (December 2020): 114047.

Galjaard, S., S. Hofman, N. Perry, and S. Ren. 2015. “Optimizing

Wohlers, Terry T., Ian Campbell, Olaf Diegel, and Joseph Kowen. 2018.

Structural Building Elements in Metal by using Additive Manufacturing.”

“Wohlers Report 2018: 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing State

In Proceedings of the International Association for Shell and Spatial

of the Industry; Annual Worldwide Progress Report.” Washington, DC:

Structures (IASS) Symposium 2015, Future Visions. Amsterdam.

Wohlers Associates.

Kladeftira, Marirena, Matthias Leschok, Eleni Skevaki, and Benjamin
Dillenburger. 2021. “Redefining Polyhedral Space Through 3D Printing.”
AAG Advances in Architectural Geometry 2020: 306–29.
MacDonald, Katie, Kyle Schumann, and Jonas Hauptman. 2019.

IMAGE CREDITS
Figure 11,13,19: ©Andrei Jipa
All other drawings and images by the authors.

“Digital Fabrication of Standardless Materials.” In ACADIA 19: Ubiquity
and Autonomy; Paper Proceedings of the 39th Annual Conference of the
Association for Computer Aided Design in Architecture. 266–75.

416

Digital Bamboo Kladeftira, Leschok, Skevaki, Tanadini, Ohlbrock,
D’Acunto, Dillenburger

Marirena Kladeftira is a Doctoral candidate at the chair of Digital
Building Technologies, ETH Zurich and affiliated with the NCCR - Digital
Fabrication, where she is leading the research on 3D printed joints for
non-standard structures. She holds a Dipl. Arch. Eng. from the NTU of
Athens and an MAS in digital fabrication from ETH Zurich.

Matthias Leschok is a PhD researcher at Digital Building
Technologies, ETH Zurich. He holds a MAS in Architecture and Digital
Fabrication from ETH Zurich and a Dipl. Ing. in architecture from KIT.
He is also co-founder and COO of the startup SAEKI Robotics AG.

Eleni Skevaki is a Research Assistant at the chair of Digital Building
Technologies, ETH Zurich. She studied Architecture at the NTU of
Athens and ENSA Paris Malaquais before joining the MAS DFAB at ETH
Zurich. She has participated in various large-scale research projects
that employ digital fabrication for concrete and other materials.

Davide Tanadini is a lecturer and PhD student at the Chair of
Structural Design at ETH Zurich. His research focuses on applications
of the theory of plasticity and graphic statics on timber structures and
timber joints, and their implementation in digital fabrication and robotic
assembly. Davide graduated from ETH Zurich as a civil engineer in
January 2018.

Patrick Ole Ohlbrock holds a degree in Civil Engineering since
September 2013. In 2020, he obtained a PhD with distinction from ETH
Zurich. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher and Lecturer at the
Chair of Structural Design at the ETH Zurich and in parallel works as a
consulting structural designer.

Pierluigi D’Acunto graduated in Building Engineering-Architecture
from the University of Pisa in 2007 and received a Master of
Architecture from the AA School of Architecture in London in 2012. In
2018, he completed his PhD with distinction at ETH Zurich. Pierluigi
is currently Assistant Professor of Structural Design at the Technical
University of Munich.

Benjamin Dillenburger is Professor at the Institute of Technology
in Architecture at the Department of Architecture, ETH Zurich. He is
leading the research group Digital Building Technologies, which investigates computational design and digital fabrication with a focus on
large scale additive manufacturing in architecture.

PERFORMATIVE DESIGN: STRUCTURAL AND MATERIAL SYNTHESIS

View publication stats

417

